Add "Maintaining consistency in codebases with Go Vet" blog post (#533)
mattermost/mattermost-developer-documentation: site/content/blog/2020-02-10-maintaining-consistency-in-codebases-with-go-vet.md

---
title: Maintaining consistency in codebases with Go Vet
slug: maintaining-consistency-in-codebases-with-go-vet
date: 2020-02-10
categories:
    - "go"
author: Jesús Espino
github: jespino
community: jesus.espino
---

At Mattermost we are a bit obsessed with the quality of our code, and one of
the things that we love is consistent and idiomatic Go. In that sense, go vet
is a great tool, because it checks a lot of things for us (useless assignments,
wrong number of Printf parameters, correct format in struct tags, etcetera) as

> part of our CI pipeline, helping us and our contributors to write better code.

Reviewer: Maintaining success in a large open-source project is one of the key objectives of Mattermost. We have hundreds of contributors and we want to create a project that could serve as a model in the Go community. Having said that, following idiomatic Go principles is the thing that we care most while maintaining our code consistency. For this specific task, we utilized `go vet` and with this blog post, I would like to explain how we pushed the limits of this tool by extending it.

The main restriction of go vet is that there are a limited number of absolute
truths about what is right and what is wrong and so the go vet checks are very
general.

In Mattermost we have a way of doing certain things like logging, test
assertions or license headers. We love to keep code consistent so we work hard

> to avoid reintroducing old patterns in the code.

Reviewer: Although `go vet` has great use in common checks, having domain-specific or even company-specific checks is inevitable to maintain a project at our scale. In Mattermost we have a way of doing certain things like logging, test assertions and adding license headers to the source files. We try our best to keep code consistent therefore we work hard to avoid reintroducing old patterns in the code.

I think the best way to explain it is with an example.

Some time ago we decided to migrate our logging approach to use structured
logging everywhere, but the migration wasn't complete and the old pattern
(logging without structured approach) was starting to appear again, in some
cases mimicking code that wasn’t migrated to the new pattern yet, and in other
cases by coincidence because the old pattern was one of the obvious approaches

> that you can follow to present data in the logs.

Reviewer: Some time ago, we re-designed our logging implementation and I think it would be a great example to showcase our work about maintaining consistency. While migrating to the new approach it didn't happen with snapping a finger hence, we observed that the old way of logging was making its way to the new PRs. Also in such cases, the old pattern was one of the obvious approaches that you can follow to present data in the logs.

So... go vet to the rescue! Go vet comes with a good bunch of checks already,

> but you can extend it by adding your own specific checks.

Reviewer: Let's dive into the topic, I will try my best to explain how we extended the go vet tool by adding our own specific checks.

We created [our own check](https://github.com/mattermost/mattermost-govet/blob/master/structuredLogging/structuredLogging.go)
of go vet avoiding any string building with `fmt.Sprintf` calls as part of the
calls to our log library. With that check implemented we were able to detect
all the cases in the code where we were doing not-structured logging and
replace them with the proper structured logging approach. After that, we added
that check to our CI pipeline to ensure that the pattern is not reintroduced

> accidentally by us or by any contributor.

Reviewer: A good starting point would be the [check](https://github.com/mattermost/mattermost-govet/blob/master/structuredLogging/structuredLogging.go) we added so that we could avoid any string building with `fmt.Sprintf` calls as part of the calls to our log library. After we added this into our CI pipeline, we were able to detect all the cases in the code where we were doing not-structured logging and replace them with the properly structured logging approach. As a consequence, we ensured that the pattern is not reintroduced accidentally by any of our contributors.

Author: Actually the timeline here is not correct, we didn't add the check to the CI and then fix everything, we created a campaign to fix that, and finalized the work using the govet check for that, and then, and only then, after the go vet check was entirely passing we activated it in the CI to avoid any reintroduction.

> Another interesting example is our approach to improve the quality of the test

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Another interesting example is our approach to improve the consistency of the test
```

Author: Actually, is more about the quality of the test assertions, I was thinking about how "semantic are they" but at the same time we were improving consistency too.

less semantic than `require.Len(t, x, 5)`. We created a [check for semantic length assertions](https://github.com/mattermost/mattermost-govet/blob/master/equalLenAsserts/equalLenAsserts.go),
adding a suggestion in the error message to replace it with the
correct assertion. We kept digging there, and we discovered that sometimes we
were checking `require.Len(t, x, 0)` which can be more semantically written as
`require.Empty(t, x)`, so we wrote the check for that, and included in the check
the case for `require.Equal(t, 0, len(x))` suggesting in both cases to use
`require.Empty`.

Other checks have been made for other purposes, for example checking the
[consistency and existence of the license in the header of our files](https://github.com/mattermost/mattermost-govet/blob/master/license/license.go), or
checking for the [consistency in the receiver variable name of the methods for the same structure](https://github.com/mattermost/mattermost-govet/tree/master/inconsistentReceiverName).

Extending go vet is a really easy task, you only need some knowledge about the
go AST because almost anything else is already handled by the go vet tool. As

> an example, this is a sample of a go vet check to find forbidden words in the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
an example, let's implement a go vet check to find forbidden words in the
```

Once we have our Analyzer we only have to register the Analyzer in our main
function to connect it with go vet using the `unitchecker.Main` function (we can
register multiple analyzers there).

Now we only need to compile it with `go build ./checkwords.go` and use it with
`go vet -vettool=./checkwords -checkWords ./file-or-module-path`.

For example, we can create an example.go file like this:

```go
package main

import "fmt"

func main() {
	fmt.Println("my candy is forbidden!")
	fmt.Println("but other strings are not")
}
```

and run our vet tool to check this with `go vet -vettool=./checkwords -checkWords example.go` and the resulting output is:

```
# command-line-arguments
./example.go:6:14: Forbidden word used, please avoid use the word candy on your strings
```

And that is all we need. Now we have an automatic way to detect undesired
patterns in our code.

Our conclusion is, using go vet is an excellent option to improve your code,
but extending it allows you to define your own patterns and maintain the
consistency of your code. If you see yourself asking for the same changes in
the PRs all the time, you can probably consider detecting this kind of problem

> automatically with go vet.

Reviewer: We are using our version for months already and our conclusion is using go vet tool is an excellent opportunity to improve your code, also, extending it allows you to define your own patterns and maintain the consistency of your code. With our open source culture you can find our implementations at our [mattermost-govet](https://github.com/mattermost/mattermost-govet) repository. If you see yourself asking for the same changes in the PRs all the time, you can probably consider detecting this kind of problem automatically with go vet.

Reviewer 2: Suggestion for above:
"We have been using our version for a number of months and our conclusion is that using the go vet tool is an excellent opportunity to improve your code. In addition extending it allows you to define your own patterns and maintain the consistency of your code. With our open source culture you can find our implementations at our mattermost-govet repository. If you see yourself asking for the same changes in the PRs all the time, you can probably consider using go vet to detect the issue/s automatically."

---

> title: Maintaining consistency in codebases with Go Vet

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
title: Maintaining consistency in codebases with Go vet
```

slug: maintaining-consistency-in-codebases-with-go-vet
date: 2020-02-10
categories:
    - "go"
author: Jesús Espino
github: jespino
community: jesus.espino
---

Maintaining success in a large open-source project is one of the key objectives
of Mattermost. We have hundreds of contributors and we want to create a project
that could serve as a model in the Go community. Having said that, following

> idiomatic Go principles is the thing that we care most while maintaining our

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
idiomatic Go principles is the thing that we care most about while maintaining our
```

code consistency. For this specific task, we utilized `go vet` and with this
blog post, I would like to explain how we pushed the limits of this tool by
extending it.

The main restriction of `go vet` is that there are a limited number of absolute
truths about what is right and what is wrong and so the `go vet` checks are very
general.

Although `go vet` has great use in common checks, having domain-specific or even
company-specific checks is inevitable to maintain a project at our scale. In

> Mattermost we have a way of doing certain things like logging, test assertions

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Mattermost we have a way of doing certain things like logging, test assertions,
```

and adding license headers to the source files. We try our best to keep code

> consistent therefore we work hard to avoid reintroducing old patterns in the

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
consistent and work hard to avoid reintroducing old patterns in the
```

code.

I think the best way to explain it is with an example.

> Some time ago, we re-designed our logging implementation and I think it would

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Some time ago, we redesigned our logging implementation and it's a
```

> be a great example to showcase our work about maintaining consistency. While

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
great example to showcase our work around maintaining consistency. While
```

> migrating to the new approach it didn't happen with snapping a finger hence, we

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
migrating to the new approach didn't happen with the snap of a finger, we
```

> observed that the old way of logging was making its way to the new PRs. Also in

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
observed that the old way of logging was making its way into new PRs. Also in
```

such cases, the old pattern was one of the obvious approaches that you can
follow to present data in the logs.

> Let's dive into the topic, I will try my best to explain how we extended the go

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Let's dive deeper into the topic, and I will try my best to explain how we extended the `go
```

> vet tool by adding our own specific checks.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
vet` tool by adding our own specific checks.
```

> A good starting point would be the [check](https://github.com/mattermost/mattermost-govet/blob/master/structuredLogging/structuredLogging.go)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
A good starting point is the [check](https://github.com/mattermost/mattermost-govet/blob/master/structuredLogging/structuredLogging.go)
```

we added so that we could avoid any string building with `fmt.Sprintf` calls as

> part of the calls to our log library. With that check implemented we were able

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
part of the calls to our logging library. With that check implemented we were able
```

> to detect all the cases in the code where we were doing not-structured logging

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
to detect all the cases in the code where we were not doing structured logging
```

> to detect all the cases in the code where we were doing not-structured logging

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
to detect all the cases in the code where we were doing not-structured logging
```
Would "unstructured" work as well?

Author: I think this is more clear because put the emphasis on the idea of is not "structured" logging.

> and replace them with the properly structured logging approach. After that, we

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
and replace them with the properly structured logging approach. We then
```

> added that check to our CI pipeline to ensure that the pattern is not

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
added that check to our CI pipeline to ensure that the pattern was not
```

reintroduced accidentally by us or by any contributor.

> Another interesting example is our approach to improve the consistency of the test

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Another interesting example is our approach to improve the consistency of test
```

> assertions. We used the [Testify](https://github.com/stretchr/testify) library

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
assertions. We use the [Testify](https://github.com/stretchr/testify) library
```

> assertions. We use the [Testify](https://github.com/stretchr/testify) library

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
assertions. We used the [Testify](https://github.com/stretchr/testify) library
```

to include more semantic assertions, but at the same time, we were using

> `t.Fatalf` calls in certain places. The `t.Fatalf` way to make fail tests was

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
`t.Fatalf` calls in certain places. The `t.Fatalf` method of failing tests was
```

> less semantic because the tests error itself is not necessarily related to the

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
less semantic because the test's error itself is not necessarily related to the
```

assertion. We created a [check to avoid the use of `t.Fatalf`](https://github.com/mattermost/mattermost-govet/blob/master/tFatal/tFatal.go) in our tests.

Once we had that, we discovered that we have some incorrectly defined
assertions. For example, we were using `require.Equal(t, 5, len(x))` which is
less semantic than `require.Len(t, x, 5)`. We created a [check for semantic length assertions](https://github.com/mattermost/mattermost-govet/blob/master/equalLenAsserts/equalLenAsserts.go),
adding a suggestion in the error message to replace it with the
correct assertion. We kept digging there, and we discovered that sometimes we
were checking `require.Len(t, x, 0)` which can be more semantically written as
`require.Empty(t, x)`, so we wrote the check for that, and included in the check
the case for `require.Equal(t, 0, len(x))` suggesting in both cases to use

> `require.Empty`.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
`require.Empty(t, x)`.
```

> Other checks have been made for other purposes, for example checking the

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Other checks have been made for other purposes. For example, checking the
```

[consistency and existence of the license in the header of our files](https://github.com/mattermost/mattermost-govet/blob/master/license/license.go), or
checking for the [consistency in the receiver variable name of the methods for the same structure](https://github.com/mattermost/mattermost-govet/tree/master/inconsistentReceiverName).

Extending `go vet` is a really easy task, you only need some knowledge about the

> go AST because almost anything else is already handled by the `go vet` tool. As

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Go AST because almost anything else is already handled by the `go vet` tool. As
```

an example, let's implement a `go vet` check to find forbidden words in the
strings of our code.

The first thing that we need is an Analyzer. An Analyzer is the struct

> responsible for receiving the AST (and some other things), find the things that

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
responsible for receiving the AST (and some other things), finding the things that
```

> responsible for receiving the ast (and some other things), find the things that

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
responsible for receiving the AST (and some other things), find the things that
```

> we consider errors, notify `go vet` of those errors, and alert the user.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
we consider errors, notifying `go vet` of those errors, and alerting the user.
```

Let's build our Analyzer.

```go
// File: checkwords.go
package main

import (
	"go/ast"
	"go/token"
	"strings"

	"golang.org/x/tools/go/analysis"
	"golang.org/x/tools/go/analysis/unitchecker"
)

var analyzer = &analysis.Analyzer{
	Name: "checkWords",
	Doc:  "check forbidden words usage in our strings",
	Run:  run,
}

func run(pass *analysis.Pass) (interface{}, error) {
	forbiddenWords := []string{
		"bird",
		"water",
		"candy",
	}

	for _, file := range pass.Files {
		ast.Inspect(file, func(node ast.Node) bool {
			switch x := node.(type) {
			case *ast.BasicLit:
				if x.Kind != token.STRING {
					return false
				}
				words := strings.Fields(x.Value)
				for _, word := range words {
					for _, forbiddenWord := range forbiddenWords {
						if word == forbiddenWord {

> 							pass.Reportf(x.Pos(), "Forbidden word used, please avoid use the word %s on your strings", word)

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
							pass.Reportf(x.Pos(), "Forbidden word used, please do not use the word %s in your strings", word)
```

						}
					}
				}
				return false
			}
			return true
		})
	}
	return nil, nil
}

func main() {
	unitchecker.Main(
		analyzer,
	)
}
```

Our Analyzer is inspecting all the files searching for `*ast.BasicLit` of `Kind`
`token.STRING`, which are our literal strings. It splits those strings by spaces,
and checks whether any of them match the forbidden words (this is a completely
basic approach, and doesn't catch a lot of cases, but for the sake of
simplicity I'll leave it as is). If it finds any forbidden words, it reports to

> the user with an error message. Go vet handles printing the filename and

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
the user with an error message; `go vet` handles printing the filename and
```

location of the error.

Once we have our Analyzer we only have to register the Analyzer in our main
function to connect it with `go vet` using the `unitchecker.Main` function (we can
register multiple analyzers there).

Now we only need to compile it with `go build ./checkwords.go` and use it with
`go vet -vettool=./checkwords -checkWords ./file-or-module-path`.

> For example, we can create an example.go file like this:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For example, we can create an `example.go` file like this:
```

```go
package main

import "fmt"

func main() {
	fmt.Println("my candy is forbidden!")
	fmt.Println("but other strings are not")
}
```

> and run our vet tool to check this with `go vet -vettool=./checkwords -checkWords example.go` and the resulting output is:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
and run our `go vet` tool to check this with `go vet -vettool=./checkwords -checkWords example.go` and the resulting output is:
```

```
# command-line-arguments

> ./example.go:6:14: Forbidden word used, please avoid use the word candy on your strings

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
./example.go:6:14: Forbidden word used, please do not use the word candy in your strings
```

```

And that is all we need. Now we have an automatic way to detect undesired
patterns in our code.

We have been using our version for a number of months and our conclusion is
that using the `go vet` tool is an excellent opportunity to improve your code. In

> addition extending it allows you to define your own patterns and maintain the

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
addition, extending it allows you to define your own patterns and maintain the
```

consistency of your code. With our open source culture you can find our
implementations at our
[mattermost-govet](https://github.com/mattermost/mattermost-govet) repository.

> If you see yourself asking for the same changes in the PRs all the time, you

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
If you see yourself asking for the same changes in PRs all the time, you
```

> can probably consider using `go vet` to detect the issue/s automatically.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
can probably consider using `go vet` to detect the issues automatically.
```

Once the patterns are created you can apply them whenever you want, maybe by

> hand from time to time, maybe as a git hook, maybe enforced by the CI, maybe

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
hand from time to time, maybe as a Git hook, maybe enforced by the CI, maybe
```
